Data Abstraction in Python

1. What is Data Abstraction?

Data Abstraction is the process of hiding internal implementation details and showing only the essential features of an object.

Main Aim

The aim is to provide a simple and clear interface while hiding complex internal implementation details.

In simple words:

“What to do” is visible, while “how to do it” is hidden.

2. When to Use Abstraction

Abstraction is useful when:

Complex internal logic should be hidden from users.

A common set of methods must be enforced for subclasses.

A simple and user-friendly interface is required.

3. How Abstraction is Achieved in Python

Python provides abstraction using:

Abstract classes

Abstract methods

The abc (Abstract Base Class) module

Important components:

ABC – used to create an Abstract Base Class.

@abstractmethod – defines a method that child classes must implement.

4. Abstract Class

An abstract class is a class that defines a common structure for its child classes.

An abstract class cannot be instantiated directly when it contains abstract methods.

Example:

from abc import ABC, abstractmethod

class Vehicle(ABC):
    @abstractmethod
    def start_engine(self):
        pass

5. Abstract Method

An abstract method defines what operation a subclass must provide, without defining its implementation in the abstract class.

Example:

@abstractmethod
def start_engine(self):
    pass

A child class must implement the abstract method before its object can be created.

6. Concrete Class

A concrete class is a class that inherits from an abstract class and implements all required abstract methods.

Example:

class Car(Vehicle):
    def start_engine(self):
        print("Car engine started")

Now a Car object can be created.

7. Bank Example

An abstract Bank class can define a common loan_interest() method.

Different banks can implement their own interest-rate logic.

For example:

SBI → 8%

HDFC → 10%

The user calls the same method without needing to know the internal implementation.

8. Concrete Methods in an Abstract Class

An abstract class can also contain concrete methods.

Example:

class Bank(ABC):
    @abstractmethod
    def loan_interest(self):
        pass

    def bank_services(self):
        print("Common services: Net Banking, ATM, Mobile App")

bank_services() is a concrete method because it has an implementation.

Child classes can directly inherit and use it.

9. Abstraction Without abc

The material notes that internal details can also be hidden using private variables/name mangling, although this is not considered true abstraction using abstract classes.

Example:

class Employee:
    def __init__(self, name, salary):
        self.name = name
        self.__salary = salary

    def show_info(self):
        print(f"Name: {self.name}")
        print("Salary is confidential.")

The private variable __salary is hidden from normal direct access.

10. Real-Life Example: ATM

An ATM provides a simple interface to the user.

User sees:

Withdraw

Deposit

Check balance

Internal details are hidden:

Balance calculations

PIN verification

Bank-server communication

Cash-dispensing logic

The user knows what to do, not how the system works internally.

11. Mini ATM Application

An abstract ATM class can define:

check_balance()

withdraw()

deposit()

A child class such as UserAccount implements these operations.

The abstract class can also contain a concrete welcome() method.

Private attributes such as __pin and __balance can hide internal data.

12. Can a Child Class Have Its Own Methods?

Yes.

A child class of an abstract class:

Must implement all abstract methods.

Can also define additional methods specific to that child class.

For example, authenticate() can be an additional method in UserAccount.

13. Concrete Method vs Instance Method

A method can be both a concrete method and an instance method.

Example:

class A:
    def show(self):
        pass

show() is:

An instance method because it has self and is called using an object.

A concrete method according to the source because it has a method body containing pass.

14. Benefits of Abstraction

Hides complex implementation details.

Provides a clean and simple interface.

Reduces confusion for users.

Encourages a common structure among subclasses.

Supports maintainability and reusability.

Helps prevent misuse of internal implementation.

15. Key Terms

Term

Meaning

ABC

Abstract Base Class from the abc module

@abstractmethod

Decorator used for methods that subclasses must implement

Abstract Class

Class containing abstract behavior and not directly instantiated when abstract methods remain

Concrete Class

Class that implements all required abstract methods

Abstract Method

Method whose implementation is provided by subclasses

Concrete Method

Method with an implementation/body

Interface

The visible operations that the user can call