Day 26 – Python OOP: Inheritance

1. What is Inheritance?

Inheritance is an OOP concept where one class acquires the properties and methods of another class.

Parent/Base class: the class whose properties and methods are inherited.

Child/Derived class: the class that inherits from the parent.

Inheritance improves code reuse and helps represent relationships between classes.

2. Types of Inheritance

Python supports the following commonly used types:

Single Inheritance

Multiple Inheritance

Multilevel Inheritance

Hierarchical Inheritance

Hybrid Inheritance

Single Inheritance

A single child class inherits from one parent class.

Structure:
Parent → Child

Example: Manager inherits from User.

Multiple Inheritance

A child class inherits from more than one parent class.

Structure:
Parent 1 + Parent 2 → Child

Example: FullstackDev inherits from FrontendDev and BackendDev.

Multilevel Inheritance

Inheritance happens in a chain. A child inherits from its parent, and another class can inherit from that child.

Structure:
Grandparent → Parent → Child

The last child can access methods available through both its parent and grandparent.

Hierarchical Inheritance

More than one child class inherits from the same parent class.

Structure:
Parent → Child 1
Parent → Child 2

For example, both Dog and Cat can inherit from Animal.

Hybrid Inheritance

Hybrid inheritance combines two or more inheritance types.

For example, a design can combine multilevel and multiple inheritance.

3. Multiple Inheritance

A child class can inherit methods from multiple parent classes.

Example:

Father provides skill1()

Mother provides skill2()

Child provides skill3()

The Child object can use methods from all three classes.

Real-world examples

FullstackDev → Frontend + Backend

DevOpsEngineer → Developer + Tester

Student → Sports + Music

4. Method Resolution Order (MRO)

When multiple classes contain methods with the same name, Python needs a rule to decide which method to execute.

This is handled by Method Resolution Order (MRO).

For a class such as:

class C(A, B):

Python searches according to the inheritance order and follows its MRO rules.

You can inspect the MRO using:

C.__mro__

Example

If both A and B contain show(), and C(A, B) does not define show(), the method from A is selected before the one from B.

MRO is especially important in multiple and hybrid inheritance.

5. Diamond Problem

The diamond problem occurs when a class inherits through multiple paths from a common base class.

Example:

A → B
A → C
B + C → D

Python uses C3 linearization to determine a consistent method lookup order.

6. Using super()

super() is a built-in function used inside a child class to access a parent class method or constructor.

Main uses

Reuse the parent constructor.

Call a parent method from a child method.

Avoid repeating initialization logic.

Parent constructor

A child constructor can call the parent constructor using:

super().__init__()

Parent method

If a child overrides a method but still needs the parent's implementation:

super().show()

super() is commonly used with constructors and method overriding.

7. Inheritance with Constructors

A child class can extend the constructor of its parent.

Example idea:

Employee stores ename and eid.

ChildEmployee adds esal.

ChildEmployee calls super().__init__(ename, eid) to initialize inherited attributes.

This allows the parent to handle its own initialization while the child handles additional data.

8. Overriding and super()

A child class can define a method with the same name as the parent class. The child implementation then takes precedence.

super() allows the child to execute the parent version as well.

Example idea:

Parent has show().

Child also has show().

Child's show() calls super().show().

Both parent and child behavior can then be used.

9. Class Variables and Parent Access

A child can define a class variable with the same name as the parent.

For example:

Parent.college = "rice"

Child.college = "pace"

self.college refers to the value associated with the child/object lookup, while Parent.college explicitly accesses the parent class variable.

10. Advantages of Inheritance

1. Code Reusability

Existing parent-class code can be reused by child classes.

2. Better Organization

Related functionality can be grouped into parent-child relationships.

3. Easier Maintenance

Common behavior can be maintained in one parent class.

4. Real-World Modeling

Inheritance can represent "is-a" relationships.

Examples:

Dog is an Animal.

Teacher is a Person.

5. Extensibility

A child can add new features without changing the parent.

6. Less Code

Common code does not have to be repeated in every child class.

11. Applications of Inheritance

Inheritance can be used in:

Object-Oriented Programming

GUI applications

Game development

E-commerce systems

Banking applications

Educational applications

Web frameworks

Examples:

GUI: Button, Window, Label can derive from a common Widget class.

Games: Player, Enemy and NPC can derive from Character.

E-commerce: ElectronicsProduct and ClothingProduct can derive from Product.

Banking: SavingsAccount and CurrentAccount can derive from Account.

Education: Student, Teacher and Admin can derive from User.

12. Disadvantages of Inheritance

1. Tight Coupling

Child classes depend on the parent class. Changes to the parent can affect children.

2. Multiple Inheritance Can Be Confusing

If multiple parents have the same method name, MRO determines which implementation is selected.

3. Method Lookup Can Become Complex

With long inheritance chains, understanding where a method comes from can be harder.

4. Less Flexibility

Poorly designed parent classes can restrict how child classes behave.

5. Overuse Creates Complexity

Deep or unnecessary inheritance hierarchies can make code difficult to read, maintain and debug.

Important Tip

Use inheritance when there is a meaningful "is-a" relationship. Do not use inheritance only for code reuse when composition would be more suitable.

13. Docstrings

A docstring is a documentation string used to describe what a function, class or module does.

Unlike an ordinary comment, a docstring can be accessed at runtime using:

.__doc__

It can also be viewed through tools such as help().

Example:

def greet(name):
    """This function greets a person."""
    print("Hello,", name)

print(greet.__doc__)

14. Hybrid Inheritance Example

Consider:

Person → Student

and another class:

Sports

Then:

Student + Sports → CollegeStudent

The CollegeStudent class gets:

display() from Person

show() from Student

play() from Sports

college_info() from itself

This combines multilevel and multiple inheritance, making it a hybrid inheritance example.